@c  Copyright (C) 1999-2009 Jens Thoms Toerring
@c
@c  This file is part of fsc2.
@c
@c  Fsc2 is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c  the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
@c  any later version.
@c
@c  Fsc2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c  GNU General Public License for more details.
@c
@c  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c  along with fsc2; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
@c  the Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
@c  Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.


@node Acknowledgments, Copying, EDL Mode for Emacs and VIM, fsc2
@appendix Acknowledgments


Parts of @code{fsc2} has been written while I was working in the
groups of Prof.@: Th.@: Prisner (J.-W.-Goethe-Universit@"at,
Frankfurt/Main) and Prof.@: K.@: M@"obius (Freie Universit@"at
Berlin). Both where so kind to allow me to spend quite some amount of
time on it. Prof.@: R.@: Bittl and Prof.@: D.@: Stehlik (Freie
Universit@"at Berlin), Prof.@: H.-J.@: Steinhoff (Universt@"at
Osnabr@"uck), Prof.@: P.@: Hildebrandt (Technische Universit@"at
Berlin), Prof.@: G.@: Gescheidt (Universit@"at Basel,
Switzerland/Technische Universit@"at Graz, Austria), Prof.@: J.@:
Schmidt and Prof.@: E.@: Groenen (Universiteit Leiden, Netherlands),
Alexander Schnegg (HMI Berlin) supported the development by employing
me to extend and improve the program and write further device drivers.

Special thanks go to Anton Savitsky (Freie Universit@"at Berlin) for
writing the modules for the @w{Thurlby 330} and @w{F.u.E. Elektronik}
@w{MCN 700-2000} power supplies, Sergey Veber (International
Tomography Center, Novosibirsk), who wrote the the module for the
@w{Schlumberger 7510} multimeter, and Clinton Jermaine McCrowey
(California State University, Northridge) for contributing the module
for the Newport Oriel Matrix Spectrometer. Christoph Oelm@"uller
(Freie Universit@"at Berlin) wrote the @code{EDL} mode for @code{vim}.

All the people using the program so far have from time to time been
(mis)used as alpha-testers. The first one accepting this unpleasant
role has been Axel Weber in Frankfurt/Main, who already dealt with the
bugs and shortcomings of the very first version (when the program was
still named @code{fsc} and the @code{f} stood for Frankfurt). Later
also Burkhard Endeward, now in Thomas Prisner's group in Frankfurt,
had to deal with it. Then, in Berlin, Stefan Weber, Chris W.@: M.@:
Kay, Gerriet Eilers, Andreas Kuppig, Heike M@"ogling, Michael Fuhs,
Anton Savitsky, Alexander Schnegg, Radek Kowalczyk, Martin Fuchs,
Celine Els@"asser, Marc Brecht, Hauke Studier, Jana Nieder, Irina
Karyagina, Sergey Veber, Christian Teutloff, Ringo Wenzel and Rolf
Simon Schoenfeld took over. Iwo Gatlik, Tomasz Motylewski, Daniela
Hristova (Basel/Graz), Huib Block, Peter Gast and Silvia Sottini
(Leiden) and Clinton McCrowey and Jussi Eloranta (Cal State
Northridge) got their share of the fun. (There are some more people
that have used the program and that I may have forgotten - please
complain to me if I did.) I would like to thank them not only for the
constant stream of bug reports and proposals for improvements or new
features (and I sometimes needed quite a bit of convincing even though
they where right) but especially for their enduring patience. Much too
often, when they had to do an important experiment, things didn't work
and they had to wait until I got it fixed. Lots of thanks to all of
them!
