@c  Copyright (C) 1999-2012 Jens Thoms Toerring
@c
@c  This file is part of fsc2.
@c
@c  Fsc2 is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c  the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
@c  any later version.
@c
@c  Fsc2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c  GNU General Public License for more details.
@c
@c  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c  along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.


@node EDL Mode for Emacs and VIM, Acknowledgments, Reserved Words, Top
@appendix EDL Mode for Emacs and VIM

There exists an @emph{emacs} mode for editing @code{EDL} scripts. It
currently does indentation and syntax highlighting.

To automatically have emacs switch to @code{EDL} mode whenever you load a
file with the extension @code{edl} you need to add the following lines
to the @file{.emacs} file in your home directory:
@example
(autoload 'edl-mode "edl-mod.elc"
 "edl-mod.el -- editing EDL files with Emacs")
(setq auto-mode-alist (append (list (cons "\\.edl\\'" 'edl-mode))
                               auto-mode-alist))
@end example

The @code{EDL} mode for @emph{vim} was written by Christoph Oelm@"uller
<@email{oelmu@@physik.fu-berlin.de}>, who was so kind to allow me to
distribute it together with @code{fsc2}.

To automatically load @code{EDL} mode under @emph{vim} put a file named
@file{filetyp.vim} in the @file{.vim} subdirectory in your home directory,
containing the following lines:
@example
if exists("did_load_filetypes")
  finish
endif
" add EDL filetype
augroup filetypedetect
au BufNewFile,BufRead *.edl     setfiletype edl
augroup END
@end example
@noindent
(or append the necessay lines if such a file already exists).
