\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c  Copyright (C) 1999-2010 Jens Thoms Toerring
@c
@c  This file is part of fsc2.
@c
@c  Fsc2 is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c  the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
@c  any later version.
@c
@c  Fsc2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c  GNU General Public License for more details.
@c
@c  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c  along with fsc2; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
@c  the Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
@c  Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.

@c  %**start of header


@setfilename fsc2.info
@settitle fsc2
@set lastupdate February 26, 2010
@iftex
@afourpaper
@end iftex

@c %**end of header


@syncodeindex fn cp


@titlepage
@sp 4
@center @titlefont{fsc2}
@sp 4
@center A Program for Remote Control of Spectrometers
@sp 2
@center February 2010
@sp 10
@center Jens Thoms T@"orring
@sp 1
@center @email{jt@@toerring.de}
@sp 16
@center Copyright @copyright{} 1999--2010 Jens Thoms T@"orring
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, provided also that the section
entitled ``Copying'', containing the GNU General Public
License (GPL), is included exactly as in the original,
and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice
identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage


@ifnottex
@direntry
* fsc2: (fsc2). A program for the remote control of spectrometers.
@end direntry


@node Top, , (dir), (dir)
@top fsc2

This manual describes @code{fsc2}, a program to control spectrometers.
Basically, @code{fsc2} is an interpreter for running scripts that
describe how experiments are to be done. The manual explains how to use
the program, how to write scripts for experiments, how to extend the
range of devices that can be controlled by writing new device modules
and lots of further topics.

@menu
* Introduction::                Basic concepts of @code{fsc2}
* GUI::                         The graphical user interface
* Web Server::                  Monitoring the experiment via the net
* EDL::                         Description of the @code{EDL} language
* Built-in Functions::          Description of all built-in functions
* Device Functions::            Description of functions for accessing devices
* Other Modules::               Modules for additional functionalities
* Using Pulsers::               How to work with the pulsers
* Example EDL Scripts::         A set of example scripts
* Command Line Options::        How to invoke @code{fsc2}
* GUI-fying::                   How to add a GUI to an @code{EDL} script
* Cloning Devices::             Creating modules for identical devices
* Internals::                   How @code{fsc2} works internally
* Writing Modules::             How to write new modules
* Installation::                How to install the program
* Device Reference::            List of devices and their functions
* Reserved Words::              List of all reserved words
* EDL Mode for Emacs and VIM::  Support for editing with emacs
* Acknowledgments::             The title says it all...
* Copying::                     The GNU General Public License
* Index::                       List of all indexed words
@end menu


@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX
and print the results, provided the printed document
carries a copying permission notice identical to this
one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, provided also that the sections
entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License''
are included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed
under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.


@end ifnottex

@contents

@include overview.texi
@include gui.texi
@include http.texi
@include edl.texi
@include builtins.texi
@include devices.texi
@include other_modules.texi
@include pulser.texi
@include examples.texi
@include cmd.texi
@include GUIfy.texi
@include cloning.texi
@include internals.texi
@include modules.texi
@include install.texi
@include dev_ref.texi
@include reserved.texi
@include emacs.texi
@include ack.texi
@include gpl.texi

@node Index, , , Top
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@bye
