@c  $Id$
@c
@c  Copyright (C) 1999-2005 Jens Thoms Toerring
@c
@c  This file is part of fsc2.
@c
@c  Fsc2 is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c  the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
@c  any later version.
@c
@c  Fsc2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c  GNU General Public License for more details.
@c
@c  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c  along with fsc2; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
@c  the Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
@c  Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.


@node Acknowledgments, Copying, EDL mode for emacs, Top
@appendix Acknowledgments


A large part of @code{fsc2} has been written while I was working in the
groups of Prof.@: Th.@: Prisner (J.-W.-Goethe-Universit@"at,
Frankfurt/Main) and Prof.@: K.@: M@"obius (Freie Universit@"at
Berlin). Both where so kind to allow me to spend quite large amounts of
time on getting it to the state it is in now. Prof.@: R.@: Bittl (Freie
Universit@"at Berlin), Prof.@: H.-J.@: Steinhoff (Universt@"at
Osnabr@"uck), Prof.@: P.@: Hildebrandt(Technische Universit@"at Berlin),
Prof.@: G.@: Gescheidt (Universit@"at Basel, Switzerland/Technische
Universit@"at Graz, Austria) and Prof.@: J.@: Schmidt and Prof.@: E.@:
Groenen (Universiteit Leiden, Netherlands) supported the development by
employing me to to extend the program and write further device drivers.

Special thanks to Anton Savitsky for writing the module for the
@w{Thurlby 330} programable power supply and allowing me to include
it into the distribution.

All the people using the program so far have from time to time been
(mis)used as alpha-testers. The first one accepting this unpleasant role
has been Axel Weber in Frankfurt/Main, who already dealt with the bugs
and shortcomings of the very first version. Later also Burkhard
Endeward had to deal with it. Then, in Berlin, Stefan Weber, Chris
W.@: M.@: Kay, Gerriet Eilers, Andreas Kuppig, Heike M@"ogling,
Michael Fuhs, Anton Savitsky, Alexander Schnegg, Radek Kowalczyk,
Martin Fuchs, Celine Els@"asser, Marc Brecht and Hauke Studier took
over. Finally, also Iwo Gatlik, Tomasz Motylewski and Daniela Hristova
(University Basel) got some share of the fun. I would like to thank
them not only for the constant stream of bug reports and proposals for
improvements or new features (and I sometimes needed quite a lot of
convincing even though they where right) but especially for their
enduring patience. Much too often, when they had to do an important
experiment things didn't work and they had to wait until I got it fixed.
Lots of thanks to all of them!
