@c $Id$
@c
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2002 Jens Thoms Toerring
@c
@c This file is part of fsc2.
@c
@c Fsc2 is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
@c any later version.
@c
@c Fsc2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c GNU General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with fsc2; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
@c the Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
@c Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.


@node Command Line Options, Cloning Devices, Using Pulsers, Top
@chapter Command Line Options
@cindex command ine options

@acronym{fsc2} can be invoked from the command line with the following
syntax:

@strong{@code{              fsc2 [OPTION] [FILE]}}

The square brackets indicate that the options as well as the file name
are optional. @code{FILE} is expected to be an @acronym{EDL} file. The
available options are:

@table @samp
@item @option{-t}
Runs a syntax check on FILE and quits. No graphic is used and all output is
written to the controlling terminal.

@item @option{-T}
Starts @acronym{fsc2} in graphics mode and immediately does a syntax
check on FILE.  When @acronym{fsc2} is done with the check it waits for
further commands.

@item @option{-S}
Starts @acronym{fsc2} in graphics mode and immediately does a syntax
check on FILE. If the syntax check does not fail the experiment is
started without the need for further user input.

@item @option{--delete}
Starts @acronym{fsc2} in graphics mode and loads FILE (or also tests
and/or starts the program when used in conjunction with the @code{-T} or
@code{-S} flags). The input file will be @strong{automatically deleted}
when @acronym{fsc2} is done with it, i.e.@ when either @acronym{fsc2}
exits or a new file is loaded. This flag is only useful for cases where
the input file is a temporary file that needs to be deleted when it
isn't needed anymore, so better be @strong{really careful}.

@item @option{-h, --help}
Displays a very short help text and exits.

@item @option{-size size}
This option specifies the sizes of the window to be used etc. Use either
@code{Small} for low resolution displays or @code{Large} for high resolution
displays. If not specified size will default to @code{Small} for
displays with a resolution of less than 1152x870, for all other to
@code{Large}. @code{Small} and @code{Large} can be abbreviated to
@code{S} or @code{s} and @code{L} and @code{l}.

@item @option{-geometry geometry_string}
This option specifies the preferred size and position of the main
window in the form @code{height x width + x-position + y-position},
see also the man page for X for a description of correct formats of
geometry strings.

@item @option{-displayGeometry geometry_string}
Sets the preferred size and position for the display window, i.e.@: the
window with the measured data.

@item @option{-cutGeometry geometry_string}
Sets the preferred size and position for the window with the
cross-section through a 2D data set.

@item @option{-toolGeometry geometry_string}
Sets the preferred position for the window with the user defined objects
like buttons, sliders and in- and output fields.  Please note that for
this window only the position part of the geometry string is used.

@item @option{-browserFontSize number}
Sets the size (in pixels) of the font to be used in both browsers in the
main window.

@item @option{-buttonFontSize number}
Sets the size (in pixels) of the font to be used for all buttons.

@item @option{-sliderFontSize number}
Sets the size (in pixels) of the font to be used for sliders and their
labels.

@item @option{-inputFontSize number}
Sets the size (in pixels) of the font to be used for the texts and
labels of input and output fields.

@item @option{-helpFontSize number}
Sets the size (in pixels) of the font to be used for the pop-up help
texts.

@item @option{-fileselectorFontSize number}
Sets the size (in pixels) of the font used in the file selector.

@item @option{-axisFont font}
This option sets the font to be used in the axes in the display window.
You will find the various X fonts in the /usr/lib/X11/fonts directory.
To find out about available X fonts the tools @code{xlsfonts},
@code{xfontsel} and @code{xfd} can be rather useful. When you specify a
font be sure to enclose the font name in quotes if the name contains
characters that the shell might try to expand.

@item @option{-stopMouseButton button_identifier}
Specifies which mouse button has to be used to activate the @code{Stop}
button while the experiment is running. Use the string @code{left} or
the number @code{1} for the left mouse button, @code{middle} or @code{2}
for the middle and @code{right} or @code{3} for the right mouse
button. Per default each of the three mouse buttons can be used.

@item @option{-noCrashMail}
Usually, @acronym{fsc2} sends an email to the author whenever it
crashes. This email contains informations about the reasons for the
crash as well as the currently loaded @acronym{EDL} program. If you
would prefer @acronym{fsc2} @b{not} to send such a mail use this
option.

@item @option{-noBalloons}
Normally, whenever the mouse hoovers over a button for some time a
little help message is shown, explaining what the button is supposed to
do. If you get annoyed with this you can switch off the display of the
help balloons.

@item @option{-httpPort}
This option tells @acronym{fsc2}s webserver on which port to listen for
incoming connections. Per default it is 8080 but using this option a
different port (in the range between 1024 and 65535) can be set.

@end table
