@c  $Id$
@c
@c  Copyright (C) 1999-2005 Jens Thoms Toerring
@c
@c  This file is part of fsc2.
@c
@c  Fsc2 is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c  the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
@c  any later version.
@c
@c  Fsc2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c  GNU General Public License for more details.
@c
@c  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c  along with fsc2; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
@c  the Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
@c  Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.


@node EDL Mode for Emacs, Acknowledgments, Reserved Words, Top
@appendix EDL Mode for Emacs

There exists a still not very useful @emph{emacs} mode for editing
@code{EDL} scripts. It currently only does syntax highlighting.  This
makes reserved words stand out and can help e.g.@: avoiding accidentally
using reserved words as variable names.

To automatically have emacs switch to EDL mode whenever you load a file
with the extension @code{edl} you need to add the following lines
to your @file{.emacs} file:
@example
(autoload 'edl-mode "edl-mod.elc"
 "edl-mod.el -- editing EDL files with Emacs")
(setq auto-mode-alist (append (list (cons "\\.edl\\'" 'edl-mode))
                               auto-mode-alist))
@end example
