. $Id$
.TH FSC2 1 "March 2001"
.SH NAME
fsc2 \- program for remote control of EPR spectrometers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fsc2
[\fIOPTION\fR] [\fIFILE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Fsc2
is a program for the remote control of EPR spectro\%meters. It interprets
programs written in \fBEDL\fR (\fBE\fRxperiment \fBD\fRescription
\fBL\fRanguage) that enables the user to describe exactly how the experiment
is to be done, which of the measured data are to be written to files and how
these data are to be displayed.

A complete description of \fBfsc2\fR and the \fBEDL\fR language is much too
long for a manual page. Please read the Texinfo, PostScript, PDF or HTML
documentation which should be installed with the program (cf. the \fBSEE
ALSO\fR section below for details).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-t\fR
Runs a syntax check on FILE and quits. No graphic is used and all output is
written to the controlling terminal.
.TP
\fB\-T\fR
Starts \fBfsc2\fR in graphics mode and immediately does a syntax check on
FILE.  When done with the check \fBfsc2\fR waits for further commands.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR
Starts \fBfsc2\fR in graphics mode and immediately does a syntax check on
FILE.  If the syntax check does not fail the experiment is started without
needing further user input.
.TP
\fB\--delete\fR
Starts \fBfsc2\fR in graphics mode and loads FILE (or also tests and/or starts
the program when used in conjunction with the \fB\-T\fR or \fB\-S\fR
flags). The input file will be \fBautomatically deleted\fR when \fBfsc2\fR is
done with it, i.e. when either \fBfsc2\fR exits or a new file is loaded. This
flag is only useful for cases where the input file is a temporary file that
needs to be deleted when it isn't needed anymore, so better be
\fBreal careful\fR.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Displays a very short help text and exits.
.TP
\fB\-geometry\fR \fIgeometry\fP
This option specifies the preferred size and position of the main window;
see \fIX(1)\fP.
.TP
\fB\-displayGeometry\fR \fIgeometry\fP
Specifies the preferred size and position of the display window.
.TP
\fB\-cutGeometry\fR \fIgeometry\fP
Specifies the preferred size and position of the cross section window.
.TP
\fB\-toolGeometry\fR \fIgeometry\fP
Specifies the preferred position of the tool window (its size can't be set).
.TP
\fB\-browserFontSize\fR \fInumber\fP
Size (in pixels) of the font to be used in browsers.
.TP
\fB\-buttonFontSize\fR \fInumber\fP
Size (in pixels) of the font to be used for button labels.
.TP
\fB\-inputFontSize\fR \fInumber\fP
Size (in pixels) of the font to be used for the text and label of input
and output objects.
.TP
\fB\-sliderFontSize\fR \fInumber\fP
Size (in pixels) of the font to be used for the text and label of sliders.
.TP
\fB\-helpFontSize\fR \fInumber\fP
Sets the size (in pixels) of the font to be used in the popup help texts.
.TP
\fB\-fileselectorFontSize\fR \fInumber\fP
Size (in pixels) of the font to be used for the file selector.
.TP
\fB\-axisFont\fR \fIfont\fP
This option sets the font to be used in the axes in the display window.  You
will find the various X fonts in the /usr/lib/X11/fonts directory.  To find
out about available X fonts the tools \fIxlsfonts(1)\fP, \fIxfontsel(1)\fP and
\fIxfd(1)\fP can be rather useful. When you specify a font be sure to enclose
the font name in quotes if the name contains characters that the shell would
try to expand.
.TP
\fB\-stopMouseButton\fR \fIbutton identifier\fR
Specifies the mouse button that must be used to activate the stop button while
the experiment is running. Use the string "left" or the number 1 for the left
mouse button, "middle" or 2 for the middle and "right" or 3 for the right
mouse button. Per default each of the three buttons can be used.
.SH RESOURCES
The program understands the following X resource names:
.TP
\fBgeometry\fR
Specifies the preferred size and position of the main window.
.TP
\fBdisplayGeometry\fR
Specifies the preferred size and position of the display window.
.TP
\fBcutGeometry\fR
Specifies the preferred size and position of the cross section window.
.TP
\fBtoolGeometry\fR
Specifies the preferred position of the tool window (its size can't be set).
.TP
\fBbrowserFontSize\fR
Size (in pixels) of the font to be used in browsers.
.TP
\fBbuttonFontSize\fR
Size (in pixels) of the font to be used for button labels.
.TP
\fBinputFontSize\fR
Size (in pixels) of the font to be used for the text and label of input
and output objects.
.TP
\fBsliderFontSize\fR
Size (in pixels) of the font to be used for the text and label of sliders.
.TP
\fBhelpFontSize\fR
Sets the size (in pixels) of the font to be used in the popup help texts.
.TP
\fBfileselectorFontSize\fR
Size (in pixels) of the font to be used for the file selector.
.TP
\fBaxisFont\fR
This option sets the font to be used in the axes in the display window.
.TP
\fBstopMouseButton\fR
Specifies the mouse button that must be used to activate the stop button while
the experiment is running.
.SH SEE ALSO
The complete documentation for \fPfsc2\fR in PostScript, PDF and HTML
(with and without using frames) format can be found in the directory
DOCDIR. Alternatively, the command
.IP
.B info fsc2
.PP
should give you access to the manual in the GNU info format.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to <Jens.Toerring@physik.fu-berlin.de>.
.SH AUTHORS
Jens Thoms Toerring <Jens.Toerring@physik.fu-berlin.de>

Many thanks to the all people who helped to test the program, proposed lots of
new ideas and constantly send in bug reports: \fBAxel Weber\fR (J.-W.-Goethe
University Frankfurt/Main), \fBStefan Weber\fR, \fBChris W. M. Kay\fR,
\fBGerriet Eilers\fR, \fBAndreas Kuppig\fR, \fBHeike Moegling\fR, \fBMichael
Fuhs\fR, \fBAlexander Schnegg\fR and \fBAnton Savitzky\fR (all at
the Free University of Berlin). Also thanks to \fBTh. Prisner\fR
(Goethe-University Frankfurt/Main) and \fBK. Moebius\fR (Free University of
Berlin) for allowing me to spend lots of time on writing the program.
