\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c $Id$
@c
@c Copyright (C) 1999-2002 Jens Thoms Toerring
@c
@c This file is part of fsc2.
@c
@c Fsc2 is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
@c any later version.
@c
@c Fsc2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c GNU General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with fsc2; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
@c the Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
@c Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.

@c %**start of header

@setfilename fsc2.info
@settitle fsc2
@set lastupdate March 16, 2002
@iftex
@afourpaper
@end iftex

@c %**end of header


@syncodeindex fn cp


@titlepage
@sp 4
@center @titlefont{fsc2}
@sp 4
@center A Program for the Remote Control of EPR Spectrometers
@sp 2
@center March 2002
@sp 10
@center Jens Thoms T@"orring
@sp 1
@center @email{Jens.Toerring@@physik.fu-berlin.de}
@sp 16
@center Copyright @copyright{} 1999--2002 Jens Thoms T@"orring
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, provided also that the sections
entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License''
are included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed
under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage


@ifinfo
@direntry
* fsc2: (fsc2). A program for the remote control of EPR spectrometers.
@end direntry


@node Top, , (dir), (dir)
@top Top

This text describes @code{fsc2}, a program to control cw- and pulsed
EPR spectrometer. Basically, @code{fsc2} is an interpreter to run a
program that describes how the experiment is to be done. After an
overview the syntax to be used is explained. This is followed by a
section about the built-in functions that may be used in the
program. Finally, it is explained who one can write modules for new
devices to be used in the experiment.


@menu
* Overview::                Basic concepts of @code{fsc2}
* GUI::                     The graphical user interface
* Web Server::              Monitoring the experiment via the net
* EDL::                     Description of @code{EDL} the language
* Built-in Functions::      Description of all built-in functions
* Device Functions::        Description of functions for accessing devices
* Using Pulsers::           How to work with the pulsers
* Example EDL Scripts::     A set of example scripts
* Command Line Options::    How to invoke @code{fsc2}
* GUI-fying::               How to add a GUI to an @code{EDL} programs
* Cloning Devices::         Creating modules for identical devices
* Internals::               How @code{fsc2} works internally
* Modules::                 How to create new modules
* Device Reference::        List of devices and their functions
* Reserved Words::          List of all reserved words
* Acknowledgments::         The title says it all...
* Copying::                 The GNU General Public License
* Index::                   List of all indexed words
@end menu


@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX
and print the results, provided the printed document
carries a copying permission notice identical to this
one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, provided also that the sections
entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License''
are included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed
under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.


@end ifinfo

@contents

@include overview.texi
@include gui.texi
@include http.texi
@include edl.texi
@include builtins.texi
@include devices.texi
@include pulser.texi
@include examples.texi
@include cmd.texi
@include GUIfy.texi
@include cloning.texi
@include internals.texi
@include modules.texi
@include dev_ref.texi
@include reserved.texi
@include ack.texi
@include gpl.texi

@node Index, , , Top
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@bye
