\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c $Id$
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2002-2004 Jens Thoms Toerring
@c
@c This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
@c any later version.
@c
@c This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c GNU General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with fsc2; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
@c the Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
@c Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
@c
@c To contact the author send email to:
@c Jens.Toerring@physik.fu-berlin.de

@c %**start of header

@setfilename me6x00.info
@settitle me6x00
@set lastupdate October 30, 2002
@iftex
@afourpaper
@end iftex

@c %**end of header


@syncodeindex fn cp


@titlepage
@sp 4
@center @titlefont{me6x00}
@sp 4
@center A Driver and Library for Meilhaus ME6x00 DAC Cards
@sp 2
@center October 2002
@sp 10
@center Jens Thoms T@"orring
@sp 1
@center @email{Jens.Toerring@@physik.fu-berlin.de}
@sp 16
@center Copyright @copyright{} 2003 Jens Thoms T@"orring
@end titlepage

@contents


This package consists of two parts. One is a kernel module that gets
loaded into the kernel and deals with the Meilhaus ME6x00 DAC cards
on the lowest level. It is based on the module distributed by Meilhaus
together with the card, written by G@"unter Gebhardt.

The other part is a library that can be linked into your programs and
which then supplies an API for your program to

In the following it is assumed that you already installed the kernel
module as well as the library successfully. Please see the README file
in the main directory of the package for installation instructions.

